>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MAY 27: PRESIDENT
TRUMP WRAPS UP HIS FIRST
OVERSEAS TRIP AS COMMANDER-IN-
CHIEF; EXAMINING THE IDEOLOGY
THAT'S FUELING TERROR ATTACKS BY
ISIS FOLLOWERS; AND, HAVE
AMERICANS BECOME ECONOMICALLY
COMPLACENT?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ON THE LAST DAY OF HIS FIRST
FOREIGN TRIP AS PRESIDENT,
DONALD TRUMP DECLINED TO ENDORSE
THE HISTORIC CLIMATE CHANGE
ACCORD SIGNED BY THE U.S. AND
194 OTHER NATIONS TWO YEARS AGO
IN PARIS.
HIS SILENCE CAME AS THE OTHER
SIX LEADERS OF THE WORLD'S
LEADING INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACIES
REAFFIRMED THEIR COMMITMENTS TO
REDUCE THE CARBON DIOXIDE
EMISSIONS RESPONSIBLE FOR GLOBAL
WARMING.
INSTEAD, MR. TRUMP SAYS HE'LL
ANNOUNCE NEXT WEEK WHETHER HE'LL
STICK WITH THE PARIS PACT OR
ABANDON IT.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAID THE CLIMATE DISCUSSION WAS
"VERY DIFFICULT, IF NOT VERY
UNSATISFYING."
AT HIS FINAL PUBLIC EVENT BEFORE
FLYING HOME AFTER NINE DAYS IN
FIVE COUNTRIES, THE PRESIDENT
SPOKE TO AMERICAN TROOPS AT THE
U.S. NAVAL AIR STATION ON THE
ITALIAN ISLAND OF SICILY.
AS HE DID EARLIER IN THE WEEK IN
BRUSSELS, MR. TRUMP PRESSED HIS
CASE THAT ALL 28 MEMBERS OF THE
NATO MILITARY ALLIANCE MUST
SPEND 2% OF THEIR GROSS DOMESTIC
PRODUCT ON DEFENSE, SOMETHING
ONLY THE U.S. AND FOUR OTHER
NATO MEMBERS DO.
>> WE'RE BEHIND NATO ALL THE
WAY, BUT WE WANT TO BE TREATED
FAIRLY.
ALL OF US WILL BE MORE SAFE AND
SECURE IF EVERYONE FULFILLS
THEIR OBLIGATIONS THE WAY
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO, RIGHT?
>> Sreenivasan: BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER THERESA MAY HAS LOWERED
HER COUNTRY'S TERRORISM THREAT
LEVEL FROM "CRITICAL," WHICH
MEANS AN ATTACK COULD BE
IMMINENT, TO "SEVERE," WHICH
INDICATES AN ATTACK IS LIKELY.
THE CHANGE COMES FIVE DAYS AFTER
A SUICIDE BOMBER KILLED 22
PEOPLE, INCLUDING SEVEN
CHILDREN, LEAVING A CONCERT BY
POP SINGER ARIANA GRANDE IN
MANCHESTER, JUST THREE HOURS
NORTH OF LONDON.
AFTER ARRESTING TWO MORE YOUNG
MEN TODAY, BRITISH POLICE HAVE
DETAINED 11 PEOPLE IN CONNECTION
TO THE INVESTIGATION.
THIS INCLUDES A NUMBER OF
RELATIVES OF THE BOMBER, WHO IS
A BRITISH-BORN-AND-RAISED SON OF
LIBYAN IMMIGRANTS.
GRANDE SAID YESTERDAY SHE
INTENDS TO RETURN TO MANCHESTER
TO PERFORM A CHARITY CONCERT TO
HELP VICTIMS OF THE ATTACK.
EGYPT IS RETALIATING FOR
YESTERDAY'S RAMADAN-EVE
TERRORIST ATTACK ON COPTIC
CHRISTIANS WHO WERE RIDING A BUS
TO A MONASTERY SOUTH OF CAIRO.
TODAY, THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP,
OR ISIS, CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE ATTACK, WHICH KILLED 29
PEOPLE.
THE EGYPTIAN AIR FORCE HAS
LAUNCHED AIR STRIKES TARGETING
BASES IN EASTERN LIBYA THAT
EGYPT SAYS ARE TRAINING GROUNDS
FOR ISIS MILITANTS.
SURVIVORS SAID EIGHT TO TEN
MASKED GUNMEN OPENED FIRE ON THE
BUSES YESTERDAY.
IT FOLLOWED TWO BOMBINGS ON PALM
SUNDAY LAST MONTH ON CHURCHES
BELONGING TO EGYPT'S CHRISTIAN
MINORITY.
IN THE U.S., POLICE IN PORTLAND,
OREGON, HAVE ARRESTED A 35-YEAR-
OLD WHITE MAN FOR ALLEGEDLY
STABBING THREE PEOPLE ON A
COMMUTER TRAIN YESTERDAY AND
CHARGED HIM WITH MURDER.
TWO PEOPLE DIED AND A THIRD WAS
TREATED FOR NON-LIFE THREATENING
WOUNDS.
POLICE SAY WITNESSES TOLD THEM,
PRIOR TO THE STABBINGS, THE
ASSAILANT HAD YELLED RACIAL
SLURS AT TWO YOUNG FEMALE
PASSENGERS WHO APPEARED TO BE
MUSLIM.
ONE WAS WEARING A HIJAB.
WITNESSES ALSO SAID THAT TWO OF
THE STABBING VICTIMS WERE MEN
WHO HAD INTERVENED TO STOP THE
VERBAL ABUSE.
BRITISH AIRWAYS SAYS A MAJOR
COMPUTER SYSTEMS FAILURE CAUSED
THE AIRLINE TO CANCEL ALL OF ITS
FLIGHTS TODAY AT BOTH OF ITS
LONDON HUBS, HEATHROW AND
GATWICK AIRPORTS.
THE MOVE LEFT TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF TRAVELERS STRANDED ON WHAT IS
ALSO A THREE-DAY HOLIDAY WEEKEND
IN THE U.K.
THE AIRLINE SAID IT HAS NO
EVIDENCE OF A CYBER ATTACK, AND
IT HOPES TO RESUME SERVICE
TOMORROW.
>> Sreenivasan: ACCORDING TO
STORIES PUBLISHED IN THE PAST 24
HOURS BY THE "WASHINGTON POST,"
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" AND
REUTERS, PRESIDENT TRUMP'S SON-
IN-LAW AND CLOSE ADVISER, JARED
KUSHNER, MADE AN UNUSUAL
PROPOSAL TO RUSSIA'S AMBASSADOR
TO THE U.S. AFTER MR. TRUMP WON
THE ELECTION.
THE NEWSPAPER SAYS LAST DECEMBER
KUSHNER SOUGHT TO ESTABLISH A
BACK CHANNEL TO THE KREMLIN BY
USING SECURE COMMUNICATIONS
INSIDE A RUSSIAN EMBASSY OR
CONSULATE IN THE U.S.
THOSE DISCUSSIONS ARE NOW
REPORTEDLY A SUBJECT OF THE
F.B.I.'S ONGOING INVESTIGATION
INTO ADMINISTRATION
RELATIONSHIPS WITH RUSSIA AND
RUSSIAN MEDDLING IN THE
ELECTION.
THE "WASHINGTON POST'S" GREG
MILLER IS ONE OF THE REPORTERS
WHO BROKE THIS STORY LAST NIGHT.
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON TO DISCUSS IT.
GREG, FIRST OFF, WAS WHAT JARED
KUSHNER DID ILLEGAL?
>> I THINK THE IDEA OF SETTING
UP A CHANNEL TO TALK WITH RUSSIA
MAY NOT BE.
IT DEPENDS ON WHAT WAS
DISCUSSED.
WE RAN INTO THIS WITH THE CASE
OF MICHAEL FLYNN, TRUMP'S FIRST
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER.
HE HAD A DISCUSSION WHERE
TECHNICALLY HE WAS RAISING
SUBJECTS THAT WOULD BREAK THE
LAW, BUT IT'S A LAW THAT WAS
200 YEARS OLD THAT HAS NEVER
BEEN ENFORCED.
SO WE MIGHT BE IN SIMILAR
TERRITORY HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WAS A
MEETING THAT WAS INITIALLY IF
NOT DENIED NOT BROUGHT TO LIGHT.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN, THIS IS THE LATEST IN A
SERIES OF CASES IN WHICH THE
WHITE HOUSE HAS HAD MANY, MANY
MONTHS TO BE UP FRONT ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED, WHEN THESE MEETINGS
HAPPENED, WHAT WAS SAID IN THESE
MEETINGS, AND THEY'RE ALWAYS
ACKNOWLEDGING THEM ONLY AFTER
THEY'RE EXPOSED IN THE PRESS.
WHAT WE'RE LEARNING NOW IS A
VERY IMPORTANT DEVELOPMENT, THAT
KUSHNER AND KISLYAK WERE
ACTUALLY DISCUSSING THE SETTING
UP OF A SECRET CHANNEL BETWEEN
THE TRUMP TRANSITION TEAM AND
MOSCOW, AND, IN FACT, WERE
DISCUSSING USING RUSSIAN
COMMUNICATIONS GEAR TO
ACCOMPLISH THAT.
THAT'S WHAT'S REALLY REMARKABLE.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S GET TO
HOW WE KNOW THAT WAS SAID.
>> THIS WAS LEARNED ABOUT ONLY
AFTER KISLYAK, THE RUSSIAN
AMBASSADOR LEAVES THAT MEETING,
AND HE'S REPORTING BACK TO
MOSCOW WHAT HAS TRANSPIRED.
THIS IS WHAT WE TALKED ABOUT.
HIS COMMUNICATIONS WITH MOSCOW,
THEY ARE UNDER SURVEILLANCE.
THEY ARE INTERCEPTED, AND THIS
IS HOW THE U.S. INTELLIGENCE
PICKED UP ON WHAT WAS DISCUSSED
IN THIS MEETING WITH KUSHNER.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO WE KNOW
THAT SERGEY KISLYAK WAS BEING
HONEST TO HIS SUPERIORS?
>> WELL, WE DON'T KNOW FOR SURE.
RUSSIAN OFFICIALS AND
INTELLIGENCE OPERATIVES WILL
OFTEN PUSH FALSEHOODS INTO
COMMUNICATIONS CHANNELS THAT
THEY KNOW THE UNITED STATES IS
MONITORING, JUST TO SOW
CONFUSION, BUT IN THIS CASE,
IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE WHAT THE
MOTIVE WOULD HAVE BEEN FOR
KISLYAK TO MISCHARACTERIZE HIS
CONVERSATION WITH KUSHNER IN
THIS WAY.
IN FACT, KISLYAK SEEMED TAKEN
ABACK BY THIS REQUEST, BASED ON
HOW HE'S RELAYING THIS TO
MOSCOW.
HE CAN'T REALLY BELIEVE, WHY
WOULD THEY WANT TO DO THIS?
WHY ARE THEY ASKING FOR THIS?
IT SEEMS STRANGE TO HIM.
IT DOESN'T FIT IN WITH HIM
EXAGGERATING HIS RELATIONSHIP
WITH KUSHNER OR AT THAT TIME
REALLY TRYING TO... WHAT WOULD
BE THE POINT OF PUTTING KUSHNER
IN A VULNERABLE POSITION THIS
WAY?
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
TIDBITS IN YOUR STORY WAS THE
"POST" WAS FIRST ALERTED OF THIS
IN MID-DECEMBER.
WHY DID IT TAKE SO LONG TO BE
ALERTED TO THIS.
>> MY COLLEAGUE GOT AN ANONYMOUS
LETTER THAT ARRIVED IN HER
MAILBOX AT THE "POST."
SHE SHARED IT WITH US.
IT DESCRIBED THINGS THAT WERE
HAPPENING IN TRUMP TOWER IN THE
TRANSITION AT THAT TIME.
ONE OF THE THINGS IT MENTIONED
WAS THAT THERE WAS A MEETING,
KUSHNER, KISLYAK, FLYNN, AND
THAT THIS IDEA OF SETTING UP A
SECRET CHANNEL WAS DISCUSSED.
NOW, WE HAD... THERE WAS NO NAME
ATTACHED TO THIS.
WE HAD NO IDEA WHO SENT IT.
THERE WAS NO WAY FOR US TO GET
BACK IN TOUCH WITH WHOEVER HAD
DONE SO.
AND SO IT JUST BASICALLY TOOK A
LONG TIME FOR US TO GET
CORROBORATION.
WHEN YOU GET A LETTER LIKE, THAT
IT CAN HELP GUIDE YOUR
REPORTING, BUT IT DOESN'T AMOUNT
TO SOURCING THAT YOU CAN REALLY
USE FOR A STORY.
YOU HAVE TO GET PEOPLE, OTHER
PEOPLE, OTHER SOURCES TO
CORROBORATE WHAT IS IN THAT
MESSAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT POSSIBLY TOOK THIS
STORY SO LONG TO PUBLISH ON A
FRIDAY AFTERNOON, MEMORIAL DAY
WEEKEND, WHAT DID THE WHITE
HOUSE SAY ABOUT THIS?
>> YEAH, WELL, I MEAN, TO US THE
WHITE HOUSE SAID VERY LITTLE
ULTIMATELY.
YOU SAW IN OUR STORY, IT SAID
THAT THE WHITE HOUSE DECLINED TO
COMMENT.
THAT WASN'T FOR LACK OF TRYING.
THERE WAS A LOT OF BACK AND
FORTH WITH THE WHITE HOUSE ON
THIS STORY, WITH KUSHNER'S
REPRESENTATIVES, AND, YOU KNOW,
THERE WAS FAIR AMOUNT SAID
THERE.
THEY WERE UNWILLING TO SHARE ANY
OF THAT WITH US ON THE RECORD OR
ALLOW US TO ATTRIBUTE IT TO EVEN
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS.
>> Sreenivasan: JARED
KUSHNER'S LAWYER HAS SAID BEFORE
THIS STORY PUBLISHED THAT THEY
ARE WILLING TO COOPERATE WITH
THE F.B.I.
IS THIS WHAT THE F.B.I. IS
PLANNING TO ASK HIM ABOUT?
>> OH, I'M CERTAIN THAT THE
F.B.I. IS DEEPLY INTERESTED IN
KUSHNER'S MEETINGS WITH RUSSIANS
ON MULTIPLE OCCASIONS AND HAVING
PRESUMABLY THE U.S. INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY HAS BROUGHT THIS TO
THE ATTENTION OF THE F.B.I.,
WHAT KISLYAK HAS RELAYED BACK TO
MOSCOW.
I'M SURE THAT THE F.B.I. IS
KEENLY INTERESTED IN LEARNING
WHY WAS IT, MR. KUSHNER, THAT
YOU FELT IT NECESSARY TO SET UP
A SECRET CHANNEL WITH MOSCOW
THAT THE U.S. GOVERNMENT COULD
NOT HAVE BEEN ABLE TO LISTEN TO?
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
THE ARTICLE IN THE "WASHINGTON
POST" HAS THREE BY-LINES.
YOURS IS ONE OF THEM.
GREG MILLER FROM THE "WASHINGTON
POST," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: BEYOND THE
UNITED KINGDOM, FRANCE HAS
ENDURED THE WORST TERRORIST
ATTACKS IN EUROPE DURING THE
PAST TWO YEARS, ATTACKS THAT
HAVE KILLED 239 PEOPLE.
THERE WAS THE ASSAULT ON THE
OFFICES OF THE SATIRICAL
MAGAZINE CHARLIE HEBDO IN
JANUARY 2015, FOLLOWED BY THE
MASS SHOOTINGS AT A CONCERT HALL
AND CAFES IN PARIS IN NOVEMBER,
AND THEN LAST SUMMER'S BASTILLE
DAY TRUCK ATTACK ON PEDESTRIANS
ON THE BOARDWALK IN NICE.
IN HIS LATEST BOOK, "TERROR IN
FRANCE: THE RISE OF JIHAD IN THE
WEST," PARIS-BASED SCHOLAR
GILLES KEPEL DELVES INTO THE
UNDERCURRENTS OF THESE ATTACKS.
I RECENTLY SPOKE TO KEPEL HERE
IN THE STUDIO.
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN FRANCE?
WHY IS IT DIFFERENT THAN THE
REST OF EUROPE IN TERMS OF THESE
ATTACKS?
>> WELL, IT'S DIFFERENT BECAUSE,
AS YOU SAID, WE HAVE 239 DEAD.
THE REASON WHY WE FOCUSED ON
FRANCE IS WE THOUGHT WE COULD
TAKE THE FRENCH HOSTAGE.
THEY THOUGHT THE MORE ATTACKS
THERE WOULD BE, THEN THE MORE
PEOPLE WOULD VOTE FOR THE
EXTREME RIGHT BECAUSE THEY FELT
THAT WAY.
SO YOU HAVE TO REMEMBER THAT THE
TERRORIST JIHADIST WANTS TO
POLITICIZE OTHER MUSLIMS, AND
THEY WANT TO SORT OF WRING THEM
UNDER THEIR BANNER, BECAUSE MOST
OF OUR MUSLIM COME PATRIOTS JUST
LOATHE THEM AND HATE THEM.
BUT THEY WANT TO SAY, THE FRENCH
ARE RACIST, THE FRENCH VOTE FOR
THE EXTREME RIGHT, THEREFORE THE
ONLY WAY FOR YOU TO BE SAFE IN
EUROPE IS TO RALLY WITH US AND
SEW JIHAD AND CIVIL STRIFE IN
EUROPE.
THIS THIRD-GENERATION JIHADISM,
WHICH I DESCRIBE IN MY BOOK
"TERROR IN FRANCE," THINKS THAT
EUROPE IS THE SOFT UNDERBELLY OF
THE WEST.
THIS IS WHERE THEY HAVE TO FOCUS
INCH EUROPE THEY WANT TO USE A
NUMBER OF DISENFRANCHISED YOUNG
MUSLIMS WHO THEY THINK SEE NO
FUTURE IN EUROPE AND THEN ARE
SORT OF MANIPULATED BY THE
CALIPHATE AND THINK THERE IS A
BREAK IN VALUES BETWEEN ISLAM
AND EUROPEAN VALUES, AND
THEREFORE, YOU KNOW, THIS IS THE
SORT OF PHENOMENON THAT WILL
LEAD TO MOBILIZE THE MASSES.
SO IT'S EASY TO KILL PEOPLE.
SO THIS IS THE QUANDARY OF
TERRORISM.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'VE HAD
TERROR ATTACKS THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD, WHETHER IT'S AFRICA,
INDONESIA, AS YOU POINT OUT IN
THE BOOK, BUT THEY DIDN'T HAVE
THE EFFECT OF DESTABILIZING
SOCIETIES.
AS YOU POINT OUT THERE, IS MORE
OF A SYSTEMATIC THOUGHT GIVEN TO
WHAT THIS THIRD GENERATION OF
TERRORISTS ARE DOING.
>> WELL, DEFINITELY.
THE ISSUE IS TO DESTABILIZE
SOCIETY AND TO PROVOKE
RETALIATION, YOU KNOW, FROM THE
MAJORITY SOCIETIES.
SO AS TO LEAD TO SORT OF ENCLAVE
WARS IN EUROPE, YOU KNOW, WE
HAVE THOSE VALUES WHERE
IMPOVERISHED YOUNG PEOPLE,
CHILDREN OF IMMIGRANTS OR OTHERS
LIVE WITH VERY HIGH LEVEL OF
UNEMPLOYMENT, RATES THAT CAN
REACH UP TO 40% AT TIMES.
SO FOR THOSE PEOPLE THERE IS NOT
MUCH HOPE.
THEY WENT TO SCHOOL.
THEY HAVE NO JOBS.
THEY DO DRUGS OR THEY GO TO
JAIL.
AND THEREFORE THIS IDEA THAT THE
FUTURE IS THE ISLAMIC STATE, IS
ISIS, WAS APPEALING TO SOME.
>> Sreenivasan: FRANCE SAW
THOUSANDS OF MEN GO TO TRAINING
CAMPS IN SYRIA AND COME BACK
INTO EUROPE.
HAS THAT FLOW DECREASED, AND IF
SO, WHY?
>> WELL, OVER THE LAST YEAR,
THERE IS NO FLOW LEFT BECAUSE
THE BORDERS BETWEEN TURKEY AND
THE ISLAMIC STATE HAVE BEEN
SEALED, AND THE TURKS ARREST
WHOEVER COMES FROM FRANCE AND
THEY PICK UP IN TURKEY.
SO TO A LARGE EXTENT THIS THREAT
THAT WE HAVE SO MANY RETURNEES
WHO HAVE BEEN TRAINED AND
BRAINWASHED AND WOULD BE VERY
POWERFUL IN STAGING HUGE ATTACKS
HAS NOT BEEN THAT SALIENT AS WE
THOUGHT IT WOULD BE.
AND THE PEOPLE THERE ON ISIS
TERRITORY ARE, YOU KNOW, SUFFER
FROM THE BOMBINGS AND FROM THE
DRONING.
AND THEREFORE THEY'RE SORT OF
TRAPPED THERE FOR THE TIME
BEING.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT'S INTERESTING ALSO
IS YOU LOOK AT THIS NOTION OF
THE LONE WOLF.
IT'S NOT ABSOLUTELY ACCURATE.
YOU TRACE IT BACK INTO IDEOLOGY
AND HOW IT'S BEEN PUBLICIZED AND
PROSELYTIZED FOR YEARS AND YEARS
NOW.
AND ONE OF THE MORE UNSETTLING
CONCLUSIONS IS THAT THE ATTACK
IN SAN BERNARDINO, THE ATTACK IN
ORLANDO, ARE NOT THE END FOR THE
UNITED STATES.
>> DEFINITELY.
LONE WOLF IS SOMEONE LIKE
COLUMBINE OR PEOPLE WHO JUST BUY
WEAPONS AND GO ON A SHOOTING
SPREE.
BUT THIS IS DIFFERENT.
I MEAN, BECAUSE YOU HAVE THIS
IDEOLOGY IN PLACE.
THERE ARE WORKS BY A SYRIAN
ENGINEER WHO POSTED ON THE
INTERNET IN 2005 A VERY LENGTHY
BOOK IN ARABIC CALLED "GLOBAL
ISLAMIC RESISTANCE" WHERE HE
SAYS THOSE ATTACKS IN YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD, THIS IS THE
SOLUTION, THAT PEOPLE IMBUED
WITH THIS ISLAMIST RADICAL
IDEOLOGY.
YOU TAKE A KNIFE, YOU TAKE A
GUN, YOU TAKE YOUR CAR, AND THEN
YOU KILL AS MANY INFIDELS AS
POSSIBLE.
THEN THEY WILL RETALIATE.
THEY WILL DESECRATE A MOSQUE OR
SOMETHING, AND THIS WILL CREATE
A SYSTEM OF PROVOCATION AND
REPRESSION, WHICH WILL LEAD UP
TO THE BREAKUP OF SOCIETY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE GOAL IS
TO BREAK SOCIETY UP FROM THE
INSIDE, TO CREATE CIVIL STRIFE.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO THE
FRENCH INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES AND
THE AUTHORITIES DEAL WITH, THIS
AND WHAT LESSONS CAN BE APPLIED
TO THE UNITED STATES?
BECAUSE IF IT IS DISTRIBUTED,
YOU CAN'T STOP THE INTERNET OR
TURN IT OFF, HOW DO YOU TRY TO
WIN HEARTS AND MINDS OR AT LEAST
PROTECT HEARTS AND MINDS FROM
GOING TO THE OTHER SIDE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, THERE IS A
PROGRAM ECONOMY OF JIHADISM
THAT, YOU KNOW, IT'S EASY TO
KILL PEOPLE, BUT AFTER A WHILE,
WHEN YOU DO NOT MANAGE TO
MOBILIZE THE MASSES ON YOUR
BEHALF, THEN VIOLENCE TURNS
AGAINST ITS PERPETRATORS, AND
YOU HAVE TO FIND A NEW MEANS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE
RIGHT MIX OF POLICY FOR THE
UNITED STATES ON THE DIPLOMATIC
FRONT AND ALSO THE SECURITY
FRONT?
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS ALREADY
PUT FORTH THEIR IDEAS ON HOW TO
TIGHTEN THE BORDERS.
NOW YOU ALSO HAVE LAPTOPS THAT
ARE BANNED FROM CERTAIN
AIRPLANES THAT ARE COMING INTO
THE UNITED STATES.
BUT ARE THESE COSMETIC?
ARE THESE STRUCTURALLY SOUND?
WILL THEY WORK?
>> WELL, YOU HAVE TO DEAL WITH
THE SYMPTOMS.
YOU HAVE TO MONITOR AND
UNDERSTAND THE IDEOLOGY.
I GUESS THIS IS SORT OF THE MIX
THAT NEWLY ELECTED PRESIDENT
MACRON WANTS TO MAKE.
HE WANTS A TERRORIST TASK FORCE
IN THE ELYSEE PALACE.
MILITARY, EDUCATION, OF COURSE.
THIS IS A BIG CHALLENGE, WHICH I
BELIEVE IS ALSO A MEANS FOR US
TO THINK ABOUT OUR OWN SOCIETY.
TERRORISM IS NOT SOMETHING WHICH
IS SOMEWHERE APART IN DISGUISE
OR ONLY IN THE PROJECTS.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE TO
WONDER WHY TERROR HAPPENS.
AND IF WE UNDERSTAND THAT
CORRECTLY, I THINK IT COULD
ALLOW US TO FIX WHAT IS GOING
WRONG IN OUR SOCIETY, ESPECIALLY
IN EUROPE TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BOOK IS
CALLED "TERROR IN FRANCE: THE
RISE OF JIHAD IN THE WEST."
PROFESSOR, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEED SOME SUMMER
READING RECOMMENDATIONS?
SEE 19 OF THEM AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AMERICANS HAVE
TYPICALLY HELD THE BELIEF THAT
WE LIVE IN A SOCIETY WHERE WE
COULD ALWAYS MOVE AHEAD, THAT
OPPORTUNITY COULD MOVE US UP THE
ECONOMIC LADDER.
BUT FOR ONE ECONOMIST, THERE IS
A SENSE THAT WE HAVE BECOME
ECONOMICALLY COMPLACENT,
RELUCTANT TO TAKE CHANCES,
AND THAT THIS IS LIMITING OUR
POTENTIAL.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: ECONOMIST TYLER
COWEN THINKS AMERICANS, FROM THE
MILLENNIALS TO THE BABY BOOMERS,
HAVE LOST THEIR SPARK.
>> EVERY AVAILABLE MEASURE WE
HAVE OF PRODUCTIVITY IN THIS
COUNTRY SHOWS THAT INNOVATION IS
SLOWING DOWN.
AND FURTHERMORE, REAL WAGES SHOW
THE SAME THING.
SO, THERE'S PEOPLE WHO SELL TO
GLOBAL MARKETS AND BECOME VERY
RICH; THEY'RE DOING GREAT.
BUT THE AVERAGE AMERICAN-- AND
YOU SEE THIS IN OUR POLITICS--
DOES NOT FEEL THEY ARE SO MUCH
BETTER OFF AND DO NOT REALLY
EXPECT THEIR CHILDREN WILL BE
MUCH BETTER OFF THAN THEY ARE.
>> Reporter: IN HIS NEW BOOK,
"THE COMPLACENT CLASS: THE SELF-
DEFEATING QUEST FOR THE AMERICAN
DREAM," COWEN ARGUES THE U.S.,
FOUNDED ON RISK AND BUILT ON
INNOVATION, HAS LOST THE
DYNAMISM THAT SET IT APART FROM
THE REST OF THE WORLD.
>> WHAT REALLY DROVE THIS BOOK
WAS A NUMBER OF TRIPS TO CHINA
THAT I DID, AND I THOUGHT,
"WELL, TODAY, CHINA IS REALLY
OUR PEER AND RIVAL, SO LET'S
WRITE ABOUT AMERICA FROM THE
POINT OF VIEW OF CHINA.
HOW DOES ALL THIS LOOK TO THE
CHINESE?"
AND INDEED, LARGE NUMBERS OF
CHINESE PEOPLE I SPOKE TO WHO
HAD VISITED THIS COUNTRY, "OH,
THE WONDERFUL BLUE SKIES.
EVERYTHING IS SO NICE.
BUT, YOU KNOW, IT'S CALM AND A
LITTLE SLEEPY, AND YOU'RE NOT
AMBITIOUS LIKE WE ARE."
>> Reporter: WHILE SOME OF
AMERICA'S MOST INFLUENTIAL
COMPANIES-- LIKE APPLE, GOOGLE
AND FACEBOOK-- PROJECT THE IMAGE
OF A COUNTRY ON THE MOVE, COWEN
VIEWS SILICON VALLEY AS
AMERICA'S OUTLIER, AND DATA
SHOWS THE NOTION THAT AMERICA
REMAINS THE HOME OF GROWTH AND
CHANGE IS WRONG.
ONE EXAMPLE OF STAGNATION?
THE INTERSTATE MIGRATION RATE
DECLINED 51% BETWEEN THE 1980s
AND 2013.
ANOTHER SIGN IS JOB LOCK.
IN 1998, 44% OF AMERICAN WORKERS
HAD HELD THE SAME JOB FOR FIVE
OR MORE YEARS.
BY 2014, 51% DID.
AND LOOK AT YOUNG ENTREPRENEURS.
THE SHARE OF AMERICANS UNDER 30
WHO OWN A BUSINESS HAS FALLEN BY
MORE THAN HALF SINCE THE 1980s.
>> STARTUPS AS A PERCENTAGE OF
OVERALL BUSINESS ACTIVITY HAVE
BEEN DECLINING SINCE THE 1980s.
THERE'S ALSO MORE CONCENTRATION
AND MORE MONOPOLY OF SOME SORT
IN THE AMERICAN ECONOMY,
ESPECIALLY AT THE RETAIL LEVEL.
AND NOT ALL OF THAT IS BAD, BUT
WHEN YOU ADD THEM ALL UP AND
THINK ABOUT HOW IT'S SHAPING OUR
OVERALL MENTALITY ABOUT WHAT WE
EXPECT FROM THE FUTURE, THAT'S
WHERE I FEAR THAT WE'RE SETTING
OUR SIGHTS FAR TOO LOW AND WE
DON'T HAVE THE AMERICAN OOMPH
THAT WE HAD THROUGHOUT MUCH OF
THE 20th CENTURY.
>> Reporter: COWEN SAYS THIS
INCREASED COMPLACENCY AND TAKING
FEWER RISKS HAS CAUSED AMERICANS
TO GROW AVERSE TO CONFLICT, AND
THAT HAS A COST.
>> WE DO HAVE A LOT OF
INNOVATIONS COMING OUT OF
SILICON VALLEY-- NETFLIX AND
AMAZON.
I USE THEM MYSELF.
BUT TO A LARGE PART, THEY
IMPROVE OUR LEISURE TIME, NOT
OUR PRODUCTIVITY.
THEY MAKE IT EASIER TO STAY AT
HOME RATHER THAN TO GO OUT AND
CHALLENGE THE WORLD.
AND FOR EACH INDIVIDUAL, THEY
MAY IMPROVE HAPPINESS OR
CONTENTMENT.
BUT WHEN DONE COLLECTIVELY,
THERE'S A PROBLEM, AS WE BECOME
LESS DYNAMIC, LESS CHALLENGING
IN BUILDING OF OUR PHYSICAL
ENVIRONMENT.
SO, I WOULD SAY THE COMPLACENT
CLASS ARE ALL OF THOSE AMERICANS
WHO DO NOT SEE THIS AS ANY KIND
OF URGENT PROBLEM, AND THAT'S
VIRTUALLY ALL OF US.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE WE'RE HAPPY
WITH OUR NETFLIX, WE'RE HAPPY
WITH OUR UBER TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS, WE'RE HAPPY WITH ALL
THESE DEVELOPMENTS?
>> YES.
BUT KEEP IN MIND, AT THE SAME
TIME, WE'RE UNHAPPY WITH OTHER
THINGS.
SO, SLOW OR ZERO WAGE GROWTH, OR
SOME PEOPLE ARE UNHAPPY ABOUT
VARIOUS POLITICIANS HAVING BEEN
ELECTED.
AND WHAT'S HARD FOR PEOPLE TO
GRASP IS THAT WHAT THEY'RE HAPPY
ABOUT AND WHAT THEY'RE UNHAPPY
ABOUT, THOSE ARE ACTUALLY TWO
SIDES OF THE SAME COIN.
AND THAT'S WHY COMPLACENCY IS
DANGEROUS.
TO THINK, YOU KNOW, IN THE
1960s, FOR ALL OF THE PROBLEMS
OF THAT ERA, WE PUT A MAN ON THE
MOON IN BASICALLY SEVEN YEARS,
STARTING FROM SCRATCH.
TODAY, WE CAN DEBATE ISSUES FOR
SEVEN YEARS AND NOT REALLY GET
ANYWHERE.
>> Reporter: AMIDST ALL THAT
SOCIAL PROTEST AND UPHEAVAL, WE
STILL ACHIEVED THIS UNBELIEVABLE
FEAT.
>> AND THOSE ARE, AGAIN, TWO
SIDES OF THE SAME COIN, THAT THE
CHAOS AND THE DYNAMISM HAVE SOME
CONNECTION.
IT'S NOT THAT RIOTS ARE A GOOD
THING-- THAT'S THE WRONG
READING; BUT RATHER, TO
UNDERSTAND THE COSTS OF TRYING
TO REMOVE ALL OF THE RISKS FROM
OUR LIVES.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT JIMMY
CARTER'S NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER, ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI,
HAS DIED AT THE AGE OF 89.
FOR THE PAST FOUR DECADES, THE
POLISH-BORN BRZEZINSKI REMAINED
AN INFLUENTIAL VOICE IN U.S.
FOREIGN POLICY.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S MEGAN
THOMPSON HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: AS PRESIDENT
CARTER'S NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISOR DURING THE COLD WAR
YEARS, ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI WAS
SEEN AS A HAWK AS HE MANAGED
CRISES FROM THE SOVIET UNION TO
THE MIDDLE EAST.
IN A STATEMENT TODAY, FORMER
PRESIDENT CARTER SAID:
IN 1978, BRZEZINSKI TRAVELED TO
CHINA TO INITIATE TALKS THAT LED
TO RESTORING FULL DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH BEIJING.
IN 1979, AFTER THE SOVIETS
INVADED AFGHANISTAN, BRZEZINSKI
ADVOCATED ARMING AFGHAN REBELS.
HE ALSO BACKED THE SOLIDARITY
MOVEMENT AGAINST COMMUNIST RULE
IN HIS NATIVE POLAND.
BRZEZINSKI SUPPORTED THE
MILITARY MISSION TO RESCUE
52 HOSTAGES HELD BY RADICALS IN
TEHRAN, BUT IT FAILED WHEN
AIRCRAFT CRASHED IN THE DESERT.
BARD COLLEGE PROFESSOR WALTER
RUSSELL MEAD KNEW BRZEZINSKI
WELL.
>> AND BRZEZINSKI'S ABILITY TO
PACKAGE HIS DEPTH OF INSIGHT AND
BREADTH OF VISION INTO A FORM
THAT WORKED IN THE WASHINGTON
POLICY PROCESS WAS REALLY AN
OUTSTANDING ACCOMPLISHMENT.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE WHITE
HOUSE YEARS, BRZEZINSKI WROTE
MORE THAN 30 BOOKS AND WAS A
MENTOR AND A COMMENTATOR.
ON THE NEWSHOUR IN 2012, HE
DISCUSSED HIS BOOK ABOUT A SHIFT
IN GLOBAL POWER WITH THE
NEWSHOUR'S JEFFREY BROWN.
>> GLOBAL POWER IS BECOMING
DIFFUSE AND NO LONGER
CONCENTRATED IN THE WEST OR IN
THE HANDS OF THE UNITED STATES.
THERE IS NO LARGER ORGANIZING
VISION FOR A WORLD THAT FOR THE
FIRST TIME NEEDS TO ADDRESS
GLOBAL PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: FORMER PRESIDENT
OBAMA SAID OF BRZEZINSKI:
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY
TONIGHT, TWO MORE PASSINGS.
ROCK STAR GREGG ALLMAN-- SINGER,
KEYBOARD AND GUITAR PLAYER, AND
CO-FOUNDER OF THE ALLMAN
BROTHERS BAND-- HAS DIED.
THE BLUESY VOICE OF HITS RANGING
FROM "MIDNIGHT RIDER" AND
"MELISSA" TO "DREAMS" AND
"WHIPPING POST," ALLMAN PASSED
AWAY TODAY AT HIS HOME IN
SAVANNAH, GEORGIA.
HE WAS 69.
YOU CAN WATCH JEFFREY BROWN'S
2012 INTERVIEW WITH ALLMAN
ONLINE AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
AND HALL OF FAME PITCHER JIM
BUNNING HAS DIED AT AGE 85.
BUNNING THREW A NO-HITTER IN
BOTH THE AMERICAN AND NATIONAL
LEAGUES, AND, AFTER BASEBALL, HE
REPRESENTED KENTUCKY FOR 22
YEARS IN THE U.S. CONGRESS.
TOMORROW ON THE BROADCAST, "SGT.
PEPPER" AT 50 AND J.F.K. AT 100.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.